Let us plot the number sequence
And from that we can get the logic to solve
this problem.
First let us plot the sequence for happy number 19
It is 82, 68, 100 and 1
So while we find sum of squares of digits,
for number one we will get one as result
And it will result in one forever
So for happy numbers, it will get into a loop
in one
Now say the sequence of non happy number 15
It will be 15 26 40 16 37 58 89
145 42 20 and 4. And 4's digit square sum
will be 16 and the loop will start
This sequence is similar to a linked list with loop
for happy number
The loop starts at the number one and
for non happy number
The loop starts at some random number other than one
Like how we detect the loop in a linked list
We can use slow and fast pointers here. In slow
pointer find the sum of square of digits one step
at a time and in fast pointer find the sum of
square of digits two steps at a time and do
the same process until they meet
If the meeting point is one, it is a happy number
And if it is not one, it is not a
happy number.
For example, let us take this number 19.
Initially both slow and fast refers the number 19
In the next step, slow will find its next number
that is 82.
At the same time, fast will find the second next
element in the sequence 68
And in the next step, slow will find number 68
fast will find number one and in the next step
Slow will find the number 100. Fast will self loop
at number one.
And in the next step both slow and fast will
meet at number one. So we can conclude that 19
is a happy number.
Similarly if we find the sequence of number 15,
slow moves to next element ahead and fast moves to second
next element. So slow reaches 26 while fast reaches 40
In the next step, slow reaches 40 and fast reaches 37.
In next step, slow moves to 16 and fast
moves to 89 and in next step slow reaches 37
Fast reaches 42
In the next step slow reaches 58 fast reaches 4
similarly in next step
Slow moves to 89 and fast moves to 37. In next
step, slow reaches 145 and fast reaches 89.
In next step, both slow and fast will meet at number 42
So we can stop the process and conclude that
15 is not a happy number since the element at
meeting point is not one.